v1.3.0 changelogs (#52)
meilisearch/engine-team: meilisearch-release-changelog/v1.3.0.md

# v1.3.0 release changelogs

Meilisearch v1.3.0 introduces Meilisearch as a vector store, it introduces visible ranking score details and defining a field to search on at search time.  It also now includes the ability to search within facet values and facet values that are sortable.

<!-- The following lines should ONLY be put in the official release changelogs -->
🧰 All official Meilisearch integrations (including SDKs, clients, and other tools) are compatible with this Meilisearch release. Integration deployment happens between 4 to 48 hours after a new version becomes available.

Some SDKs might not include all new features—consult the project repository for detailed information. Is a feature you need missing from your chosen SDK? Create an issue letting us know you need it, or, for open-source karma points, open a PR implementing it (we'll love you for that ❤️).

# New features and improvements 🔥

> ## Vector Store

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Vector Store - Experimental
```

> The release of v1.3.0 enables Meilisearch to serve as a vector store. This means Meilisearch now accepts vectors in documents, stores them, and lets users retrieve the nearest documents using the search endpoint.

Reviewer: We need to say how to activate the exp feature (quickly)

Author: Cool yea I've added in a piece to here and to the scoring side about using the new /experimental-features end point

    { "id": 2, "_vectors": [[0.5, 3, 1], [-0.2, 4, 6]], "text": "Hello People", "_semanticSimilarity": 0.78 }
  ],
  "query": "",
  "vector": [0, 1, 2],
  "processingTimeMs": 0,
  "limit": 20,
  "offset": 0,
  "estimatedTotalHits": 2
}
```

TBD - should this be with the new endpoint instead??
When launching Meilisearch, use the following flag:
```bash
meilisearch --experimental-score-details
```

🗣️ Since this feature is experimental, we need your help to iterate on it! You are more than welcome to share your thoughts and your feedback on [this discussion](https://github.com/meilisearch/meilisearch/discussions/621).

⚠️ The experimental feature API can break between Meilisearch versions. Be careful if using it in production.

Done by @Kerollmops in #3825

## Display ranking details at search

Meilisearch v1.3.0 introduces score details per document via the `showRankingScore` search query parameter. With this in place each document will return with a `_rankingScore` property displaying a score between 0 and 1. The higher the ranking score, the more relevant the document.

```json 
"_rankingScore": 0.8575757575757575,
```

> Additionally, as an experimental feature, you can view detailed scoring per ranking rule for each document via the `showRankingScoreDetails` search query parameter. With this in place each document will return with a `_rankingScoreDetails` JSON object. That object will contain a property and a score value for each ranking rule. 

Reviewer: I would do another sub-section as `experimental` and quickly say how to activate it.

Author: good idea, thats changed now

}
```
And the following query:
```json
{
  "q": "adventure",
  "attributesToSearchOn": ["genre"]
}
```
Meilisearch will only return document 1.

Both documents contain the word adventure, but `"attributesToSearchOn": ["genre"]` instructs Meilisearch to only consider results found on the genre field.

Done by @ManyTheFish in (#3834)

## Search for facet values
Meilisearch v1.3.0 introduces a new endpoint  `POST /indexes/{index}/facet-search` that allows you to search for facet values. Only fields defined as `filterableAttributes` will be facet searchable.

Done by @Kerollmops in (#3611)

## Sort facet values by count
By default, all facet values are sorted in ascending alphanumeric order. With the release of v1.3.0 you can change this using the `sortFacetValuesBy` property of the [`faceting` index settings](/reference/api/settings#faceting). This will allow you to sort facet by value count i.e. the genre with the highest number of results shows first.

Done by @Kerollmops in (#3612)

### Performance improvements

* Use `RoaringBitmap::deserialize_unchecked_from` to reduce the deserialization time (#3788) @Kerollmops 

> * Remove the `docid_word_positions` database (#3819) @loiclec

Reviewer: You can put it in `Other improvements` sub section

What does the second point? only performance improvement? I would say also reduce the size of the DB

Reviewer: Yes I confirm, [Loic's PR](https://github.com/meilisearch/meilisearch/pull/3819) is linked to [this issue](https://github.com/meilisearch/meilisearch/issues/3816)

## Language support improvements

* TBD charabia changes to be included

## Other improvements

> * Improve the metrics (#3789) @irevoire

Reviewer: I guess it's planned, but maybe quick mention of the improvements here

Author: thats updated now

# Fixes 🐞

  * Changes the way words are counted in the word count DB (#3824) @dureuill 
  * Fix addition deletion bug (#3670) @irevoire

# Misc

* Dependencies upgrade
  * Bump actions/setup-go from 3 to 4 (#3805) @dependabot
  * Bump Swatinem/rust-cache from 2.2.1 to 2.4.0 (#3803) @dependabot 

>   * Bump svenstaro/upload-release-action from 2.5.0 to 2.6.1 (#3804) @dependabot

Reviewer: No need to put dependabot, not a human 😊

Author: do you still include the PRs in the changelog & just not mention dependabot with @ ?

Reviewer: PRs are more important to mention than dependabot

# v1.3.0 release changelogs

Meilisearch v1.3.0 introduces Meilisearch as a vector store, it introduces visible ranking score details and defining a field to search on at search time.  It also now includes the ability to search within facet values and facet values that are sortable.

<!-- The following lines should ONLY be put in the official release changelogs -->
🧰 All official Meilisearch integrations (including SDKs, clients, and other tools) are compatible with this Meilisearch release. Integration deployment happens between 4 to 48 hours after a new version becomes available.

Some SDKs might not include all new features—consult the project repository for detailed information. Is a feature you need missing from your chosen SDK? Create an issue letting us know you need it, or, for open-source karma points, open a PR implementing it (we'll love you for that ❤️).

# New features and improvements 🔥

## Vector Store - Experimental

> The release of v1.3.0 enables Meilisearch to serve as a vector store. This means Meilisearch now accepts vectors in documents, stores them, and lets users retrieve the nearest documents using the search endpoint.

Author: going to add embeddings here as well, it seems like it might be better terminology to use. i.e. "This means Meilisearch now accepts multiple embeddings (semantic vectors) per document, stores them, and lets users retrieve the nearest documents using the `/search` or `/multi-search` routes."

> This experimental feature can be enabled at runtime using v1.3.0's new `/experimental-features` endpoint.

Reviewer 2: Which means that could can try it directly on the Cloud, DAY ONE ☝️

Author: I added in a link there too with our OSS tracker on it 👍🏻

```bash
curl \
  -X PATCH 'http://localhost:7700/experimental-features/' \
  -H 'Content-Type: application/json'  \
--data-binary '{

>     "vectorSearch": true

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    "vectorStore": true
```

  }'

```

### Sending Vectorized Documents

For the first iteration of this feature you must compute the vectors on your side before sending to Meilisearch. Vectors should be sent with the document itself using the `_vectors` field. Multiple vectors can be sent for a single document.

⚠️ Note the size of the vectors must be the same across all of your documents. If the sizes are inconsistent Meilisearch will show an error in your tasks.

```bash
curl -X POST -H 'content-type: application/json' \
'localhost:7700/indexes/myvectors/documents' \
--data-binary '[
    { "id": 0, "_vectors": [0, 0.8, -0.2], "text": "Hello World" },
    { "id": 1, "_vectors": [1, -0.2, 0], "text": "Hello Doggy" },
    { "id": 2, "_vectors": [[0.5, 3, 1], [-0.2, 4, 6]], "text": "Hello People" }
]'
```

### Query Meilisearch using Vectors

> You can query the nearest documents using the default `/search` route by sending the vector of your query via the `vector` field. Again, for the first iteration you must compute the vector query on your side before requesting from Meilisearch.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can query the documents with the nearest vector using the default `/search` route by sending the vector of your query via the `vector` field. Again, for the first iteration you must compute the vector query on your side before requesting from Meilisearch.
```

```bash
curl -X POST -H 'content-type: application/json' \
'localhost:7700/indexes/myvectors/search' \
--data-binary '{ "vector": [0, 1, 2] }'
```

### Similarity score

> As part of v1.3.0 Meilisearch will return a similarity score as part of the documents retrieved. This score will be between 0 and 1 and viewed under the `_semanticSimilarity` property. The higher the ranking score, the more similar the document.

Reviewer 2: Ho! The score field has been renamed to `_semanticScore` 😊
You can find more info in [this discussion](https://github.com/meilisearch/product/discussions/677).

Reviewer 2: Can we add that the score is a dot product and that's it for now?

Author: Thanks! Just to clarify do you mean for me to say 'The score is a dot product viewed under the _semanticScore property' (and remove the higher the score comment?)

Author: The examples show it like '_semanticScore": 0.6754 ' if that's what you mean?

Reviewer 2: No, I wanted to specify that the score is in fact a dot product. Maybe you can add that somewhere? :)

Author: thats updated now

                    "order": 3,
                    "attributes_ranking_order": 0.8,
                    "attributes_query_word_order": 0.6363636363636364,
                    "score": 0.7272727272727273
                },
                "exactness": {
                    "order": 4,
                    "matchType": "noExactMatch",
                    "score": 0.3333333333333333
                }
            }
```

This experimental feature can be turned on at runtime using v1.3.0's new `/experimental-features` endpoint.
```bash
 curl \
  -X PATCH 'http://localhost:7700/experimental-features/' \
  -H 'Content-Type: application/json'  \
--data-binary '{
    "scoreDetails": true
  }'

```

🗣️ Since this feature is experimental, we need your help to iterate on it! You are more than welcome to share your thoughts and your feedback on [this discussion](https://github.com/meilisearch/product/discussions/594).

⚠️ The experimental feature API can break between Meilisearch versions. Be careful if using it in production.

Done by @dureuill in #3771

## Define field to search on at search time

v1.3.0 introduces a new search parameter, `attributesToSearchOn`.

> `attributesToSearchOn` is a search parameter accepting an array of strings indicating one or more document attributes. Queries using `attributesToSearchOn` will restrict the search to the indicated attributes.

Author: thats updated now

By default, all facet values are sorted in ascending alphanumeric order. With the release of v1.3.0 you can change this using the `sortFacetValuesBy` property of the [`faceting` index settings](https://www.meilisearch.com/docs/reference/api/settings#faceting). This will allow you to sort facet by value count i.e. the genre with the highest number of results shows first.

Done by @Kerollmops in (#3612)

### Performance improvements

* Use `RoaringBitmap::deserialize_unchecked_from` to reduce the deserialization time (#3788) @Kerollmops 

### Language support improvements

<!-- Charabia changelogs from 0.7.2 onwards: -->
* Transform classifier into normalizer (#214) @ManyTheFish 
* Update Lindera to 0.24.0 (#212) @mosuka
* Handle underscore similarly to dash (#216) @vvv 
* Add UniDic implimentation (#218) @mosuka
* Bump peter-evans/create-pull-request from 4 to 5 (#213)
* Bump Swatinem/rust-cache from 2.2.1 to 2.4.0 (#217)

### Other improvements
* Improve the metrics. Provides metrics on the task queue such as the number of queued tasks and the number of processing tasks. Adds the real database size used by Meilisearch. Prefixes all metrics with `_meilisearch`. (#3789) @irevoire

> * Removes the `docid_word_positions` database, which was only used during deletion operations. This change reduces the index size & fixes an issue around incorrect deletion of documents when using the disableOnAttributes typo setting. (#3819, #3816) @loiclec

Author: yep good idea, added in the latest

* Adds the new experimental features endpoint to enable/disable scoreDetail and vectorSearch experimental features (#3850) @dureuill 
* Update Charabia version to v.0.7.3
  * Fixes an issue where searching for words without `.` doesn't match any string in the index. ([#151](https://github.com/meilisearch/product/discussions/151), [#3778](https://github.com/meilisearch/meilisearch/discussions/3778))

# Fixes 🐞
  * Fixes an issue with the MatchesFull strategy when the query contains a hard separator. Changes the way words are counted in the word count DB. (#3824) @dureuill 

>   * Fix addition deletion bug. Re-enables automatically batching addition and deletion tasks together to speed up indexing (#3670) @irevoire 

Author: have moved it now 👍🏻

Meilisearch v1.3.0 introduces Meilisearch as a vector store, it introduces visible ranking score details and defining fields to search on at search time. It also now includes the ability to search within facet values and sort facet values by count.

<!-- The following lines should ONLY be put in the official release changelogs -->
🧰 All official Meilisearch integrations (including SDKs, clients, and other tools) are compatible with this Meilisearch release. Integration deployment happens between 4 to 48 hours after a new version becomes available.

Some SDKs might not include all new features—consult the project repository for detailed information. Is a feature you need missing from your chosen SDK? Create an issue letting us know you need it, or, for open-source karma points, open a PR implementing it (we'll love you for that ❤️).

# New features and improvements 🔥

## Vector Store - Experimental
The release of v1.3.0 enables Meilisearch to serve as a vector store. This means Meilisearch now accepts multiple embeddings (semantic vectors) per document, stores them, and lets users retrieve the nearest documents using the `/search` or `/multi-search` routes.

> This experimental feature can be enabled at runtime using v1.3.0's new `/experimental-features` endpoint.

Author: thats updated now

    { "id": 1, "_vectors": [1, -0.2, 0], "text": "Hello Doggy", "_semanticScore": 0.7546 },
    { "id": 2, "_vectors": [[0.5, 3, 1], [-0.2, 4, 6]], "text": "Hello People", "_semanticScore": 0.78 }
  ],
  "query": "",
  "vector": [0, 1, 2],
  "processingTimeMs": 0,
  "limit": 20,
  "offset": 0,
  "estimatedTotalHits": 2
}
```

🗣️ Since this feature is experimental, we need your help to iterate on it! You are more than welcome to share your thoughts and your feedback on [this discussion](https://github.com/meilisearch/product/discussions/677).

⚠️ The experimental feature API can break between Meilisearch versions. Be careful if using it in production.

Done by @Kerollmops in #3825

## Display ranking scores at search

Meilisearch v1.3.0 introduces ranking scores per document via the `showRankingScore` search query parameter. With this in place each document will return with a `_rankingScore` property displaying a score between 0 and 1. The higher the ranking score, the more relevant the document.

```json 
"_rankingScore": 0.8575757575757575,
```

### Ranking score details - Experimental 

> Additionally, as an experimental feature, you can view detailed scores per ranking rule for each document via the `showRankingScoreDetails` search query parameter. With this in place each document will return with an `_rankingScoreDetails` JSON object. That object will contain a property and a score value for each ranking rule. 

Author: I added an example here as well, hopefully that helps

```json 
"_rankingScoreDetails": {
                "words": {
                    "order": 0,
                    "matchingWords": 1,
                    "maxMatchingWords": 1,
                    "score": 1.0
                },
                "typo": {
                    "order": 1,
                    "typoCount": 0,
                    "maxTypoCount": 1,
                    "score": 1.0
                },
                "proximity": {
                    "order": 2,
                    "score": 1.0
                },
                "attribute": {
                    "order": 3,
                    "attributes_ranking_order": 0.8,
                    "attributes_query_word_order": 0.6363636363636364,
                    "score": 0.7272727272727273
                },
                "exactness": {
                    "order": 4,
                    "matchType": "noExactMatch",
                    "score": 0.3333333333333333
                }
            }
```

> This experimental feature can be turned on at runtime using v1.3.0's new `/experimental-features` endpoint.

Author: thats updated now

`attributesToSearchOn` is a search parameter accepting an array of strings indicating one or more document attributes. Queries using `attributesToSearchOn` will restrict the search to the indicated attributes. Note the chosen attributes must be part of the [searchable attributes](https://www.meilisearch.com/docs/learn/configuration/displayed_searchable_attributes#the-searchableattributes-list) in settings.

Given the following dataset:
```json
{
  "id": 0,
  "name": "Our Wives Under the Sea",
  "genre": ["horror", "scifi"],
  "synopsis": "A woman returns to her wife transformed after a deep-sea adventure."
},
{
  "id": 1,
  "name": "A Strange and Stubborn Endurance",
  "genre": ["adventure"],
  "synopsis": "A man must overcome trauma and fight off a mysterious assassin."
}
```
And the following query:
```json
{
  "q": "adventure",
  "attributesToSearchOn": ["genre"]
}
```
Meilisearch will only return document 1.

Both documents contain the word adventure, but `"attributesToSearchOn": ["genre"]` instructs Meilisearch to only consider results found on the genre field.

Done by @ManyTheFish in (#3834)

## Search for facet values

> Meilisearch v1.3.0 introduces a new endpoint  `POST /indexes/{index}/facet-search` that allows you to search for facet values. Only fields defined as `filterableAttributes` will be facet-searchable. Facet search supports [prefix search](https://www.meilisearch.com/docs/learn/advanced/prefix) and [typo tolerance](https://www.meilisearch.com/docs/learn/configuration/typo_tolerance).

Author: example added now

> Meilisearch v1.3.0 introduces a new endpoint  `POST /indexes/{index}/facet-search` that allows you to search for facet values. Only fields defined as `filterableAttributes` will be facet-searchable. Facet search supports [prefix search](https://www.meilisearch.com/docs/learn/advanced/prefix) and [typo tolerance](https://www.meilisearch.com/docs/learn/configuration/typo_tolerance).

Author: I added examples for the sorting side as well. @Kerollmops could you take a look at those and make sure I've understood correctly please if you get a chance

Done by @Kerollmops in (#3699)

## Sort facet values by count
By default, all facet values are sorted in ascending alphanumeric order. With the release of v1.3.0 you can change this using the `sortFacetValuesBy` property of the [`faceting` index settings](https://www.meilisearch.com/docs/reference/api/settings#faceting). This will allow you to sort facet by value count i.e. the genre with the highest number of results shows first.

Done by @Kerollmops in (#3612)

> ### Performance improvements

Reviewer: Can be removed and integrated into the "Other improvement" section

Reviewer: We usually don't do "performance improements" section -> we did it for v1.2 because we had a lot to put into it thanks to the search refactor

Author: ah cool thanks! will update

Author: thats gone now and moved into other improvements

@Kerollmops tagging you just because one of your comments was to move something to the performance block. I've just pulled it all into Other improvements now as above.

* Add UniDic implimentation (#218) @mosuka
* Bump peter-evans/create-pull-request from 4 to 5 (#213)
* Bump Swatinem/rust-cache from 2.2.1 to 2.4.0 (#217)

### Other improvements
* Improve the metrics. Provides metrics on the task queue such as the number of queued tasks and the number of processing tasks. Adds the real database size used by Meilisearch. (#3789) @irevoire
* Add "meilisearch" prefix to last metrics that were missing it (#3861) @dureuill 
* Removes the `docid_word_positions` database, which was only used during deletion operations. In our tests this change reduced approximately 15% of the index size. It also fixes an issue around incorrect deletion of documents when using the disableOnAttributes typo setting.  (#3819, #3816) @loiclec
* Adds the new experimental features endpoint to enable/disable `scoreDetails` and `vectorStore` experimental features (#3850) @dureuill 
* Update Charabia version to v.0.7.3
  * Fixes an issue where searching for words without `.` doesn't match any string in the index. ([#151](https://github.com/meilisearch/product/discussions/151), [#3778](https://github.com/meilisearch/meilisearch/discussions/3778))

# Fixes 🐞

>   * Fixes an issue with the MatchesFull strategy when the query contains a hard separator. Changes the way words are counted in the word count DB. (#3824) @dureuill 

Author: Cool, I've slightly reworded what you have if you want to just make sure it still makes sense

# Misc

* Dependencies upgrade
  * Bump actions/setup-go from 3 to 4 (#3805)
  * Bump Swatinem/rust-cache from 2.2.1 to 2.4.0 (#3803)
  * Bump svenstaro/upload-release-action from 2.5.0 to 2.6.1 (#3804)

* CIs and tests
  * Add a cron test with disabled tokenization (with @roy9495) (#3779) @curquiza
  * Improve SDK CI to choose the Docker image (#3783) @curquiza
  * Fix SDK CI for scheduled jobs (#3813) @curquiza

>   * Fix SDK CI (again) (#3844) @curquiza

Author: thats updated now

  * Fix error messages in `check-release.sh` (#3799) @vvv

* Documentation
  * Move comments above keys in config.toml (#3731) @jirutka 
  * Add more documentation to graph-based ranking rule algorithms + comment cleanup (#3835) @loiclec

>   * docs: fixed some broken links (#3853) @0xflotus 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  * Fix some broken links (#3853) @0xflotus 
```

  }'

```

Alternatively, it is possible to specify ordering per facet i.e. order the genre facet by count, for everything else apply alphanumeric ordering.

```bash
 curl \
  -X PATCH 'http://localhost:7700/indexes/movies/settings/faceting \
  -H 'Content-Type: application/json'  \
--data-binary '{
    "sortFacetValuesBy": {"*": "alpha", "genre": 'count'}
  }'

```

Done by @Kerollmops in (#3612)

### Language support improvements

* Enhance Japanese words segmentation (#218) @mosuka
* Enhance Separator based segmentation (#215) @ManyTheFish 

Done by @ManyTheFish, @mosuka in [#] and in [Charabia v0.7.3](https://github.com/meilisearch/charabia/releases/tag/v0.7.3)

### Other improvements
* Improve the experimental feature to use metrics with Prometheus ([#625](https://github.com/meilisearch/product/discussions/625)). Provides metrics on the task queue such as the number of queued tasks and the number of processing tasks. Adds the real database size used by Meilisearch. Add "meilisearch" prefix to metrics (#3789, #3861) @irevoire @dureuill 
* Reduce the size the index size (approximately 15%) by removing an internal database (#3819) @loiclec

> * Fix an issue around incorrect deletion of documents when using the `disableOnAttributes` typo setting  (#3819) @loiclec

Reviewer: Just realized it's a bug fix

Author: moved 👍🏻

* Adds the new experimental features endpoint to enable/disable `scoreDetails` and `vectorStore` experimental features (#3850) @dureuill 
* Reduce deserialization time by using `RoaringBitmap::deserialize_unchecked_from` which reduces the number of checks (#3788) @Kerollmops 
* Re-enables automatically batching addition and deletion tasks together to speed up indexing (#3670) @irevoire 

> * Fixes an issue where searching for words without `.` doesn't match any string in the index. ([#151](https://github.com/meilisearch/product/discussions/151), [#3778](https://github.com/meilisearch/meilisearch/discussions/3778))

Reviewer: It's a bug fix then?

    { "id": 2, "_vectors": [[0.5, 3, 1], [-0.2, 4, 6]], "text": "Hello People", "_semanticScore": 0.78 }
  ],
  "query": "",
  "vector": [0, 1, 2],
  "processingTimeMs": 0,
  "limit": 20,
  "offset": 0,
  "estimatedTotalHits": 2
}
```

🗣️ Since this feature is experimental, we need your help to iterate on it! You are more than welcome to share your thoughts and your feedback on [this discussion](https://github.com/meilisearch/product/discussions/677).

⚠️ The experimental feature API can break between Meilisearch versions. Be careful if using it in production.

Done by @Kerollmops in #3825

## Display ranking scores at search

Meilisearch v1.3.0 introduces ranking scores per document via the `showRankingScore` search query parameter. 

```bash 
curl \
  -X POST 'http://localhost:7700/indexes/movies/search' \
  -H 'Content-Type: application/json' \
  --data-binary '{ "q": "Batman Returns", "showRankingScore": true }'
```

Using this search query parameter means that each document will return with a `_rankingScore` property displaying a score between 0 and 1. The higher the ranking score, the more relevant the document.

```json 
"_rankingScore": 0.8575757575757575,

> ```

Reviewer: Not sure if this part is really usefull thanks to the sentence right above

Author: it does give an example is the only thing, see discussion here: https://github.com/meilisearch/engine-team/pull/52#discussion_r1245124720 happy to remove if you think its not neccesary

Reviewer: No I will not go against this, it's a tiny detail 👌

```

With this search query parameter in place each document will return with an `_rankingScoreDetails` JSON object. That object will contain a property and a score value for each ranking rule. 

```json 
"_rankingScoreDetails": {
                "words": {
                    "order": 0,
                    "matchingWords": 1,
                    "maxMatchingWords": 1,
                    "score": 1.0
                },
                "typo": {
                    "order": 1,
                    "typoCount": 0,
                    "maxTypoCount": 1,
                    "score": 1.0
                },
                "proximity": {
                    "order": 2,
                    "score": 1.0
                },
                "attribute": {
                    "order": 3,
                    "attributes_ranking_order": 0.8,
                    "attributes_query_word_order": 0.6363636363636364,
                    "score": 0.7272727272727273
                },
                "exactness": {
                    "order": 4,
                    "matchType": "noExactMatch",
                    "score": 0.3333333333333333
                }
            }

> ```

Reviewer: Can we have a 2 spaces indentation?

Author: thats updated

> This experimental feature can be turned on via the HTTP API using v1.3.0's new `/experimental-features` endpoint. If you are using [Meilisearch Cloud](https://www.meilisearch.com/pricing?utm_campaign=oss&utm_source=engine&utm_medium=meilisearch) this can be enabled immeadiately after upgrade.

Author: https://github.com/meilisearch/engine-team/pull/52#discussion_r1244912339 it was in response to this review. Just wanted to highlight that it can be available on cloud moreso. Perhaps the wording confuses the message? 🤔

> This experimental feature can be turned on via the HTTP API using v1.3.0's new `/experimental-features` endpoint. If you are using [Meilisearch Cloud](https://www.meilisearch.com/pricing?utm_campaign=oss&utm_source=engine&utm_medium=meilisearch) this can be enabled immeadiately after upgrade.

Reviewer 2: I wanted to say that you can try it new experimental features on the Cloud as you no more have to reboot the bainry by hand :)

> This experimental feature can be turned on via the HTTP API using v1.3.0's new `/experimental-features` endpoint. If you are using [Meilisearch Cloud](https://www.meilisearch.com/pricing?utm_campaign=oss&utm_source=engine&utm_medium=meilisearch) this can be enabled immeadiately after upgrade.

Reviewer: Yes, but the users don't know this originally, I mean, they did not have the opportunity to complain they cannot use it on the cloud side. It's supposed to work on the Cloud side by default for them.
It's really confusing to me to talk about this here, and can send the opposite message of "the other features don't work with the cloud"
I would rather we highlight the cloud at the beginning of the changelog if we want to highlight it

> This experimental feature can be turned on via the HTTP API using v1.3.0's new `/experimental-features` endpoint. If you are using [Meilisearch Cloud](https://www.meilisearch.com/pricing?utm_campaign=oss&utm_source=engine&utm_medium=meilisearch) this can be enabled immeadiately after upgrade.

Reviewer 2: Ok, let's talk about the Cloud at the beginning of the changelog :)

> This experimental feature can be turned on via the HTTP API using v1.3.0's new `/experimental-features` endpoint. If you are using [Meilisearch Cloud](https://www.meilisearch.com/pricing?utm_campaign=oss&utm_source=engine&utm_medium=meilisearch) this can be enabled immeadiately after upgrade.

Author: I've removed the references from Vector Store and Scoring and added the block we have from the readme up a tthe top instead. Thanks folks 🙌

```bash
 curl \
  -X PATCH 'http://localhost:7700/experimental-features/' \
  -H 'Content-Type: application/json'  \

> --data-binary '{

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  --data-binary '{
```

  "name": "Our Wives Under the Sea",
  "genre": ["horror", "scifi"],
  "synopsis": "A woman returns to her wife transformed after a deep-sea adventure."
},
{
  "id": 1,
  "name": "A Strange and Stubborn Endurance",
  "genre": ["adventure"],
  "synopsis": "A man must overcome trauma and fight off a mysterious assassin."
}
```
And the following query:
```json
{
  "q": "adventure",
  "attributesToSearchOn": ["genre"]
}
```
Meilisearch will only return document 1.

Both documents contain the word adventure, but `"attributesToSearchOn": ["genre"]` instructs Meilisearch to only consider results found on the genre field.

Done by @ManyTheFish in (#3834)

## Search for facet values
Meilisearch v1.3.0 introduces a new endpoint  `POST /indexes/{index}/facet-search` that allows you to search for facet values. Only fields defined as `filterableAttributes` will be facet-searchable. Facet search supports [prefix search](https://www.meilisearch.com/docs/learn/advanced/prefix) and [typo tolerance](https://www.meilisearch.com/docs/learn/configuration/typo_tolerance).

```bash
 curl \
  -X POST 'http://localhost:7700/indexes/movies/facet-search' \
  -H 'Content-Type: application/json'  \

> --data-binary '{

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  --data-binary '{
```

    "facetQuery": "a"
  }'

```

Done by @Kerollmops in (#3699)

## Sort facet values by count
By default, all facet values are sorted in ascending alphanumeric order. 
```json
"sortFacetValuesBy": {"*": "alpha"}
```

With the release of v1.3.0 you can now order by `count` using the `sortFacetValuesBy` property of the [`faceting` index settings](https://www.meilisearch.com/docs/reference/api/settings#faceting). This allows you to sort facet values in descending order by the number of documents containing that facet value.

It is possible to change this ordering for all facets using `*`:

```bash
 curl \
  -X PATCH 'http://localhost:7700/indexes/movies/settings/faceting \
  -H 'Content-Type: application/json'  \
--data-binary '{
    "sortFacetValuesBy": {"*": "count"}
  }'

```

Alternatively, it is possible to specify ordering per facet i.e. order the genre facet by count, for everything else apply alphanumeric ordering.

```bash
 curl \
  -X PATCH 'http://localhost:7700/indexes/movies/settings/faceting \
  -H 'Content-Type: application/json'  \
--data-binary '{
    "sortFacetValuesBy": {"*": "alpha", "genre": 'count'}
  }'

```

Done by @Kerollmops in (#3612)

> ### Language support improvements
> 
> <!-- Charabia changelogs from 0.7.2 onwards: -->
> * Transform classifier into normalizer (#214) @ManyTheFish 
> * Update Lindera to 0.24.0 (#212) @mosuka
> * Handle underscore similarly to dash (#216) @vvv 
> * Add UniDic implimentation (#218) @mosuka
> * Bump peter-evans/create-pull-request from 4 to 5 (#213)
> * Bump Swatinem/rust-cache from 2.2.1 to 2.4.0 (#217)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
### Language support improvements

<!-- Charabia changelogs from 0.7.2 onwards: -->
* Enhance Japanese words segmentation (#218) @mosuka
* Enhance Separator based segmentation (#215) @ManyTheFish 
```

Author: thanks Many! I'll put this in place and then when we have the PR link for 1.3 I'll update with that

### Other improvements

> * Improve the metrics. Provides metrics on the task queue such as the number of queued tasks and the number of processing tasks. Adds the real database size used by Meilisearch. (#3789) @irevoire

Reviewer: "Improve the experimental feature to use metrics with Prometheus" + link to the related [product discussion](https://github.com/meilisearch/product/discussions/625)

Author: did you want me to remove the following description also or just add this in place of "Improve the metrics."?

Reviewer: Sorry my message was really unclear, I just wrote how it popped into my mind 😂 
Let me check what you changed!

Reviewer: Good to me 👌

> * Add "meilisearch" prefix to last metrics that were missing it (#3861) @dureuill 

Reviewer: Can't this line be part of the prometheus feature improvement?

Author: oh these were hidden and I missed them! yea it was a different PR but definitely could be. I'll adjust

Author: thats changed

> * Removes the `docid_word_positions` database, which was only used during deletion operations. In our tests this change reduced approximately 15% of the index size. It also fixes an issue around incorrect deletion of documents when using the disableOnAttributes typo setting.  (#3819, #3816) @loiclec

Reviewer: Make it more user oriented, they don't know about "database"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Reduce the size the index size (approximately 15%) by removing an internal database (#3819) @loiclec
* Fix an issue around incorrect deletion of documents when using the `disableOnAttributes` typo setting  (#3819) @loiclec
```

* Adds the new experimental features endpoint to enable/disable `scoreDetails` and `vectorStore` experimental features (#3850) @dureuill 
* Use `RoaringBitmap::deserialize_unchecked_from` to reduce the deserialization time (#3788) @Kerollmops 

> * Fix addition deletion bug. Re-enables automatically batching addition and deletion tasks together to speed up indexing (#3670) @irevoire 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Re-enables automatically batching addition and deletion tasks together to speed up indexing (#3670) @irevoire 
```

* Update Charabia version to v.0.7.3
  * Fixes an issue where searching for words without `.` doesn't match any string in the index. ([#151](https://github.com/meilisearch/product/discussions/151), [#3778](https://github.com/meilisearch/meilisearch/discussions/3778))

# Fixes 🐞

>   * Fix matching results returned by the `exactness` ranking rules when there are hard separators present (#3824) @dureuill 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Fix matching results returned by the `exactness` ranking rules when there are hard separators present (#3824) @dureuill 
```

# New features and improvements 🔥

## Vector Store - Experimental
The release of v1.3.0 enables Meilisearch to serve as a vector store. This means Meilisearch now accepts multiple embeddings (semantic vectors) per document, stores them, and lets users retrieve the nearest documents using the `/search` or `/multi-search` routes.

This experimental feature can be enabled via the HTTP API using v1.3.0's new `/experimental-features` endpoint.

```bash
curl \
  -X PATCH 'http://localhost:7700/experimental-features/' \
  -H 'Content-Type: application/json'  \
  --data-binary '{
    "vectorStore": true
  }'

```

### Sending Vectorized Documents

For the first iteration of this feature you must compute the vectors on your side before sending to Meilisearch. Vectors should be sent with the document itself using the `_vectors` field. Multiple vectors can be sent for a single document.

⚠️ Note the size of the vectors must be the same across all of your documents. If the sizes are inconsistent Meilisearch will show an error in your tasks.

```bash
curl -X POST -H 'content-type: application/json' \

> 'localhost:7700/indexes/myvectors/documents' \

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
'localhost:7700/indexes/songs/documents' \
```

--data-binary '[

>     { "id": 0, "_vectors": [0, 0.8, -0.2], "text": "Hello World" },

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
    { "id": 0, "_vectors": [0, 0.8, -0.2], "title": "Across The Universe" },
```

>     { "id": 1, "_vectors": [1, -0.2, 0], "text": "Hello Doggy" },

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
    { "id": 1, "_vectors": [1, -0.2, 0], "title": "All Things Must Pass" },
```

>     { "id": 2, "_vectors": [[0.5, 3, 1], [-0.2, 4, 6]], "text": "Hello People" }

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
    { "id": 2, "_vectors": [[0.5, 3, 1], [-0.2, 4, 6]], "title": "And Your Bird Can Sing" }
```

]'
```

### Query Meilisearch using Vectors

You can query the documents with the nearest vector using the default `/search` route by sending the vector of your query via the `vector` field. Again, for the first iteration you must compute the vector query on your side before requesting from Meilisearch.

```bash
curl -X POST -H 'content-type: application/json' \

> 'localhost:7700/indexes/myvectors/search' \

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
'localhost:7700/indexes/songs/search' \
```

--data-binary '{ "vector": [0, 1, 2] }'
```

### Similarity score
As part of v1.3.0 Meilisearch will return a similarity score as part of the documents retrieved. The score is a dot product viewed under the `_semanticScore` property.

```json
{
  "hits": [

>     { "id": 0, "_vectors": [0, 0.8, -0.2], "text": "Hello World", "_semanticScore": 0.6754 },

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
    { "id": 0, "_vectors": [0, 0.8, -0.2], "title": "Across The Universe", "_semanticScore": 0.6754 },
```

>     { "id": 1, "_vectors": [1, -0.2, 0], "text": "Hello Doggy", "_semanticScore": 0.7546 },

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
    { "id": 1, "_vectors": [1, -0.2, 0], "title": "All Things Must Pass", "_semanticScore": 0.7546 },
```

>     { "id": 2, "_vectors": [[0.5, 3, 1], [-0.2, 4, 6]], "text": "Hello People", "_semanticScore": 0.78 }

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
    { "id": 2, "_vectors": [[0.5, 3, 1], [-0.2, 4, 6]], "title": "And Your Bird Can Sing", "_semanticScore": 0.78 }
```

```json 
"_rankingScoreDetails": {
  "words": {
    "order": 0,
    "matchingWords": 1,
    "maxMatchingWords": 1,
    "score": 1.0
  },
  "typo": {
    "order": 1,
    "typoCount": 0,
    "maxTypoCount": 1,
    "score": 1.0
  },
  "proximity": {
    "order": 2,
    "score": 1.0
  },
  "attribute": {
    "order": 3,
    "attributes_ranking_order": 0.8,
    "attributes_query_word_order": 0.6363636363636364,
    "score": 0.7272727272727273
  },
  "exactness": {
    "order": 4,
    "matchType": "noExactMatch",
    "score": 0.3333333333333333
  }
}
```

This experimental feature can be turned on via the HTTP API using v1.3.0's new `/experimental-features` endpoint. 

```bash
 curl \
  -X PATCH 'http://localhost:7700/experimental-features/' \
  -H 'Content-Type: application/json'  \
  --data-binary '{
    "scoreDetails": true
  }'

```

🗣️ Since this feature is experimental, we need your help to iterate on it! You are more than welcome to share your thoughts and your feedback on [this discussion](https://github.com/meilisearch/product/discussions/674).

> ⚠️ The experimental feature API can break between Meilisearch versions. Be careful if using it in production.

Reviewer 5: Could we remove the "Be careful if using it in production"? I feel the score is production-ready, and we want as many people as possible to test it, so we shouldn't discourage production use.

A more accurate statement would be "Code using this feature might need to be modified in future versions".

Reviewer 5: tbh I'm not sure I 💯 understand the messaging from https://github.com/meilisearch/engine-team/blob/main/resources/experimental-features.md now that I re-read it.

On the one hand: 

> ⚠️ Experimental features are NOT [prototypes](https://github.com/meilisearch/engine-team/blob/main/resources/prototypes.md). All experimental features are thoroughly tested before release and follow the same quality standards as other features.

On the other hand:

> Experimental features are not recommended for production environments

Why?

I understand not recommending Prototypes for production environments because they could exhibit quality of implementation issues, but for experimental features I think the trade off is more along the line: "you can use it if you accept that you might have to do more work to upgrade during versions".

What do you think?

Reviewer: No strong opinion on it! 
The message I want to see is "careful, the API can break". 

For me, in the guide it should have been written something like "Experimental features are not recommended for production environments because the API can break between 2 versions of Meilisearch"
You can re-phrase it differently if you are not comfortable with it. The main purpose is to let the users know the API can break.

Reviewer: "⚠️ The experimental feature API can break between Meilisearch versions. Be aware of this if using it in production."

Author: Works for me, thanks @curquiza 👌

Author: thats updated now in both place, resolving. thanks!

```json
"sortFacetValuesBy": {"*": "alpha"}
```

With the release of v1.3.0 you can now order by `count` using the `sortFacetValuesBy` property of the [`faceting` index settings](https://www.meilisearch.com/docs/reference/api/settings#faceting). This allows you to sort facet values in descending order by the number of documents containing that facet value.

It is possible to change this ordering for all facets using `*`:

```bash
 curl \
  -X PATCH 'http://localhost:7700/indexes/movies/settings/faceting \
  -H 'Content-Type: application/json'  \
  --data-binary '{
    "sortFacetValuesBy": {"*": "count"}
  }'

```

Alternatively, it is possible to specify ordering per facet i.e. order the genre facet by count, for everything else apply alphanumeric ordering.

```bash
 curl \
  -X PATCH 'http://localhost:7700/indexes/movies/settings/faceting \
  -H 'Content-Type: application/json'  \
--data-binary '{
    "sortFacetValuesBy": {"*": "alpha", "genre": 'count'}
  }'

```

Done by @Kerollmops in (#3612)

### Language support improvements

* Enhance Japanese words segmentation (#218) @mosuka
* Enhance Separator based segmentation (#215) @ManyTheFish 

> Done by @ManyTheFish, @mosuka in [#] and in [Charabia v0.7.3](https://github.com/meilisearch/charabia/releases/tag/v0.7.3)

Author: @ManyTheFish is this going to be version v0.8.0 rather than 0.7.3? 
I just saw: https://github.com/meilisearch/charabia/pull/221 but there also seems to be a 0.7.3 one so I just want to be sure

Reviewer 3: Yes there are some breaking changes in the Charabia API :)

Author: thanks! should we mention details about that in the changelogs here?

Reviewer: Nope, the changes in the Charabia API does not impact the meilisearch users. The Charabia library is breaking, but not Meilisearch
Let me know if I'm wrong @ManyTheFish

By default, all facet values are sorted in ascending alphanumeric order. 
```json
"sortFacetValuesBy": {"*": "alpha"}
```

With the release of v1.3.0 you can now order by `count` using the `sortFacetValuesBy` property of the [`faceting` index settings](https://www.meilisearch.com/docs/reference/api/settings#faceting). This allows you to sort facet values in descending order by the number of documents containing that facet value.

It is possible to change this ordering for all facets using `*`:

```bash
 curl \
  -X PATCH 'http://localhost:7700/indexes/movies/settings/faceting \
  -H 'Content-Type: application/json'  \
  --data-binary '{
    "sortFacetValuesBy": {"*": "count"}
  }'

```

Alternatively, it is possible to specify ordering per facet i.e. order the genre facet by count, for everything else apply alphanumeric ordering.

```bash
 curl \
  -X PATCH 'http://localhost:7700/indexes/movies/settings/faceting \
  -H 'Content-Type: application/json'  \
--data-binary '{
    "sortFacetValuesBy": {"*": "alpha", "genre": 'count'}
  }'

```

Done by @Kerollmops in (#3612)

### Language support improvements

* Enhance Japanese words segmentation (#218) @mosuka

> * Enhance Separator based segmentation (#215) @ManyTheFish 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* Enhance Separator-based Tokenization (#215) @ManyTheFish
  - words containing `_` are now properly segmented into several words
  - brackets `{([])}` are no more considered as context separators so words separated by brackets are now considered near together for the proximity ranking rule
```

# v1.3.0 release changelogs

Meilisearch v1.3.0 introduces Meilisearch as a vector store, it introduces visible ranking score details and defining fields to search on at search time. It also now includes the ability to search within facet values and sort facet values by count.

<!-- The following lines should ONLY be put in the official release changelogs -->
🧰 All official Meilisearch integrations (including SDKs, clients, and other tools) are compatible with this Meilisearch release. Integration deployment happens between 4 to 48 hours after a new version becomes available.

Some SDKs might not include all new features—consult the project repository for detailed information. Is a feature you need missing from your chosen SDK? Create an issue letting us know you need it, or, for open-source karma points, open a PR implementing it (we'll love you for that ❤️).

## ⚡ Supercharge your Meilisearch experience

> Say goodbye to server deployment and manual updates with [Meilisearch Cloud](https://www.meilisearch.com/pricing?utm_campaign=oss&utm_source=engine&utm_medium=meilisearch). No credit card required.

Author: thanks, I'll put rulers around it and keep it up there as it's important for visibility.

# New features and improvements 🔥

## Vector Store - Experimental
The release of v1.3.0 enables Meilisearch to serve as a vector store. This means Meilisearch now accepts multiple embeddings (semantic vectors) per document, stores them, and lets users retrieve the nearest documents using the `/search` or `/multi-search` routes.

This experimental feature can be enabled via the HTTP API using v1.3.0's new `/experimental-features` endpoint.

```bash
curl \
  -X PATCH 'http://localhost:7700/experimental-features/' \
  -H 'Content-Type: application/json'  \
  --data-binary '{
    "vectorStore": true
  }'

```

### Sending Vectorized Documents

For the first iteration of this feature you must compute the vectors on your side before sending to Meilisearch. Vectors should be sent with the document itself using the `_vectors` field. Multiple vectors can be sent for a single document.

⚠️ Note the size of the vectors must be the same across all of your documents. If the sizes are inconsistent Meilisearch will show an error in your tasks.

```bash

> curl -X POST -H 'content-type: application/json' \
> 'localhost:7700/indexes/songs/documents' \
> --data-binary '[
>     { "id": 0, "_vectors": [0, 0.8, -0.2], "title": "Across The Universe" },
>     { "id": 1, "_vectors": [1, -0.2, 0], "title": "All Things Must Pass" },
>     { "id": 2, "_vectors": [[0.5, 3, 1], [-0.2, 4, 6]], "title": "And Your Bird Can Sing" }
> ]'

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
curl -X POST -H 'content-type: application/json' \
  'localhost:7700/indexes/songs/documents' \
  --data-binary '[
      { "id": 0, "_vectors": [0, 0.8, -0.2], "title": "Across The Universe" },
      { "id": 1, "_vectors": [1, -0.2, 0], "title": "All Things Must Pass" },
      { "id": 2, "_vectors": [[0.5, 3, 1], [-0.2, 4, 6]], "title": "And Your Bird Can Sing" }
  ]'
```

⚠️ The experimental feature API can break between Meilisearch versions. Be aware of this if using it in production.

Done by @Kerollmops in #3825

## Display ranking scores at search

Meilisearch v1.3.0 introduces ranking scores per document via the `showRankingScore` search query parameter. 

```bash 
curl \
  -X POST 'http://localhost:7700/indexes/movies/search' \
  -H 'Content-Type: application/json' \
  --data-binary '{ "q": "Batman Returns", "showRankingScore": true }'
```

Using this search query parameter means that each document will return with a `_rankingScore` property displaying a score between 0 and 1. The higher the ranking score, the more relevant the document.

```json 
"_rankingScore": 0.8575757575757575,
```

### Ranking score details - Experimental 

Additionally, as an experimental feature, you can view detailed scores per ranking rule for each document via the `showRankingScoreDetails` search query parameter. 

```bash 
curl \
  -X POST 'http://localhost:7700/indexes/movies/search' \
  -H 'Content-Type: application/json' \
  --data-binary '{ "q": "Batman Returns", "showRankingScoreDetails": true }'
```

> With this search query parameter in place each document will return with an `_rankingScoreDetails` JSON object. That object will contain a property and a score value for each ranking rule. 

Author: Adding this but removing 'using' as I don't think that should be there any more with the reword

  "words": {
    "order": 0,
    "matchingWords": 1,
    "maxMatchingWords": 1,
    "score": 1.0
  },
  "typo": {
    "order": 1,
    "typoCount": 0,
    "maxTypoCount": 1,
    "score": 1.0
  },
  "proximity": {
    "order": 2,
    "score": 1.0
  },
  "attribute": {
    "order": 3,
    "attributes_ranking_order": 0.8,
    "attributes_query_word_order": 0.6363636363636364,
    "score": 0.7272727272727273
  },
  "exactness": {
    "order": 4,
    "matchType": "noExactMatch",
    "score": 0.3333333333333333
  }
}
```

This experimental feature can be turned on via the HTTP API using v1.3.0's new `/experimental-features` endpoint. 

```bash
 curl \
  -X PATCH 'http://localhost:7700/experimental-features/' \
  -H 'Content-Type: application/json'  \
  --data-binary '{
    "scoreDetails": true
  }'

```

🗣️ Since this feature is experimental, we need your help to iterate on it! You are more than welcome to share your thoughts and your feedback on [this discussion](https://github.com/meilisearch/product/discussions/674).

⚠️ The experimental feature API can break between Meilisearch versions. Be aware of this if using it in production.

### Relevancy change on `attribute` ranking rule

> Previously, the documents with attributes containing the query words at the beginning of the attribute would be considered more relevant than documents containing the query words at the end of the attributes.
> 
> With this change the ranking rule considers the distance to the position of the word in the query rather than the absolute distance to the beginning of the document.

Reviewer 6: Most of the times it's better to begin with the change, as many people will be skimming the changelog and only read the first few words of a section.

```suggestion
The `attribute` ranking rule now determines relevancy based on the distance to the position of the word in the query rather than the absolute distance to the beginning of a document.

Previously, documents with attributes containing search terms at the beginning of the attribute would be considered more relevant than documents containing search terms at the end of an attribute.
```

Done by @dureuill in #3771

## Define fields to search on at search time

> v1.3.0 introduces a new search parameter, `attributesToSearchOn`.
> 
> `attributesToSearchOn` is a search parameter accepting an array of strings indicating one or more document attributes. Queries using `attributesToSearchOn` will restrict the search to the indicated attributes. Note the chosen attributes must be part of the [searchable attributes](https://www.meilisearch.com/docs/learn/configuration/displayed_searchable_attributes#the-searchableattributes-list) in settings.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
`attributesToSearchOn` is a new search parameter accepting an array of strings indicating one or more document attributes. Queries using `attributesToSearchOn` will restrict the search to the indicated attributes. 

Attributes passed to `attributesToSearchOn` must be in the [searchable attributes list](https://www.meilisearch.com/docs/learn/configuration/displayed_searchable_attributes#the-searchableattributes-list).
```

Given the following dataset:

> ```json

Reviewer 6: ````suggestion

```json
````

{
  "id": 0,
  "name": "Our Wives Under the Sea",
  "genre": ["horror", "scifi"],
  "synopsis": "A woman returns to her wife transformed after a deep-sea adventure."
},
{
  "id": 1,
  "name": "A Strange and Stubborn Endurance",
  "genre": ["adventure"],
  "synopsis": "A man must overcome trauma and fight off a mysterious assassin."
}

> ```

Reviewer 6: ````suggestion
```

````

> And the following query:

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
And the following query:

```

```json
{
  "q": "adventure",
  "attributesToSearchOn": ["genre"]
}
```
Meilisearch will only return document 1.

> Both documents contain the word adventure, but `"attributesToSearchOn": ["genre"]` instructs Meilisearch to only consider results found on the genre field.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
Both documents contain the term `"adventure"`, but `"attributesToSearchOn": ["genre"]` instructs Meilisearch to only consider results found on the `genre` field.
```

Done by @ManyTheFish in (#3834)

## Search for facet values

> Meilisearch v1.3.0 introduces a new endpoint  `POST /indexes/{index}/facet-search` that allows you to search for facet values. Only fields defined as `filterableAttributes` will be facet-searchable. Facet search supports [prefix search](https://www.meilisearch.com/docs/learn/advanced/prefix) and [typo tolerance](https://www.meilisearch.com/docs/learn/configuration/typo_tolerance).

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
The new endpoint `POST /indexes/{index}/facet-search` allows you to search for facet values. Only fields defined as `filterableAttributes` will be facet-searchable.

Facet search supports [prefix search](https://www.meilisearch.com/docs/learn/advanced/prefix) and [typo tolerance](https://www.meilisearch.com/docs/learn/configuration/typo_tolerance).
```

```bash
 curl \
  -X POST 'http://localhost:7700/indexes/movies/facet-search' \
  -H 'Content-Type: application/json'  \
  --data-binary '{
    "facetName": "genres",
    "facetQuery": "a"
  }'

> 

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
```

```

Done by @Kerollmops in (#3699)

> ## Sort facet values by count

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
## Sort facet values by count

```

> By default, all facet values are sorted in ascending alphanumeric order. 
> ```json
> "sortFacetValuesBy": {"*": "alpha"}
> ```
> 
> With the release of v1.3.0 you can now order by `count` using the `sortFacetValuesBy` property of the [`faceting` index settings](https://www.meilisearch.com/docs/reference/api/settings#faceting). This allows you to sort facet values in descending order by the number of documents containing that facet value.
> 
> It is possible to change this ordering for all facets using `*`:

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
Order facets by `count` using the `sortFacetValuesBy` property of the [`faceting` index settings](https://www.meilisearch.com/docs/reference/api/settings#faceting). This allows you to sort facet values in descending order by the number of matched documents containing that facet value.

It is possible to change this ordering for all facets using `*`:
```

```bash
 curl \
  -X PATCH 'http://localhost:7700/indexes/movies/settings/faceting \
  -H 'Content-Type: application/json'  \
  --data-binary '{
    "sortFacetValuesBy": {"*": "count"}
  }'

> 

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
```

```

> Alternatively, it is possible to specify ordering per facet i.e. order the genre facet by count, for everything else apply alphanumeric ordering.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
Alternatively, it is possible to order a single facet by `count`, while other attributes follow alphanumeric ordering:
```

```bash
 curl \
  -X PATCH 'http://localhost:7700/indexes/movies/settings/faceting \
  -H 'Content-Type: application/json'  \
--data-binary '{
    "sortFacetValuesBy": {"*": "alpha", "genre": 'count'}
  }'

> 

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
```

```

Done by @Kerollmops in (#3612)

### Language support improvements

> * Enhance Japanese words segmentation (#218) @mosuka

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
* Enhance Japanese word segmentation (#218) @mosuka
```

Reviewer 6: Better, but not sure if correct from a technical perspective:

```suggestion
* Enhance Japanese segmentation (#218) @mosuka
```

* Enhance Separator-based Tokenization (#215) @ManyTheFish
  - words containing `_` are now properly segmented into several words
  - brackets `{([])}` are no more considered as context separators so words separated by brackets are now considered near together for the proximity ranking rule

Done by @ManyTheFish, @mosuka in [#3866] and in [Charabia v0.8.1](https://github.com/meilisearch/charabia/releases/tag/v0.8.1)

### Other improvements
* Improve the experimental feature to use metrics with Prometheus ([#625](https://github.com/meilisearch/product/discussions/625)). Provides metrics on the task queue such as the number of queued tasks and the number of processing tasks. Adds the real database size used by Meilisearch. Add "meilisearch" prefix to metrics (#3789, #3861) @irevoire @dureuill 

> * Reduce the size the index size (approximately 15%) by removing an internal database (#3819) @loiclec

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
* Reduce index size (~15%) by removing an internal database (#3819) @loiclec
```

* Adds the new experimental features endpoint to enable/disable `scoreDetails` and `vectorStore` experimental features (#3850) @dureuill 

> * Reduce deserialization time by using `RoaringBitmap::deserialize_unchecked_from` which reduces the number of checks (#3788) @Kerollmops 

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
* Reduce deserialization time by using `RoaringBitmap::deserialize_unchecked_from` (#3788) @Kerollmops 
```

> * Re-enables automatically batching addition and deletion tasks together to speed up indexing (#3670) @irevoire 

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
* Re-enable autobatching for addition and deletion tasks (#3670) @irevoire 
```

# Fixes 🐞
* Fix matching results returned by the `exactness` ranking rules when there are hard separators present (#3824) @dureuill 

> * Fixes an issue where searching for words without `.` doesn't match any string in the index. ([#151](https://github.com/meilisearch/product/discussions/151), [#3778](https://github.com/meilisearch/meilisearch/discussions/3778))

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
* Fixes an issue where searching for words without `.` doesn't match any string in the index ([#151](https://github.com/meilisearch/product/discussions/151), [#3778](https://github.com/meilisearch/meilisearch/discussions/3778))
```

* Fix an issue around incorrect deletion of documents when using the `disableOnAttributes` typo setting  (#3819) @loiclec

# Misc

* Dependencies upgrade
  * Bump actions/setup-go from 3 to 4 (#3805)
  * Bump Swatinem/rust-cache from 2.2.1 to 2.4.0 (#3803)
  * Bump svenstaro/upload-release-action from 2.5.0 to 2.6.1 (#3804)

> 

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
```

  ]'
```

### Query Meilisearch using Vectors

Use the new `vector` search parameter with the `/search` and `/multi-search` to search for documents with the nearest vector. You must compute the vector query with a third-party tool.

```bash
curl -X POST -H 'content-type: application/json' \
'localhost:7700/indexes/songs/search' \
--data-binary '{ "vector": [0, 1, 2] }'
```

### Similarity score

When you use vector search, returned documents include a `_semanticScore` field.

```json
{
  "hits": [
    { "id": 0, "_vectors": [0, 0.8, -0.2], "title": "Across The Universe", "_semanticScore": 0.6754 },
    { "id": 1, "_vectors": [1, -0.2, 0], "title": "All Things Must Pass", "_semanticScore": 0.7546 },
    { "id": 2, "_vectors": [[0.5, 3, 1], [-0.2, 4, 6]], "title": "And Your Bird Can Sing", "_semanticScore": 0.78 }
  ],
  "query": "",
  "vector": [0, 1, 2],
  "processingTimeMs": 0,
  "limit": 20,
  "offset": 0,
  "estimatedTotalHits": 2
}
```

🗣️ This feature is experimental and we need your help to improve it! Share your thoughts and feedback on [this GitHub discussion](https://github.com/meilisearch/product/discussions/677).

> ⚠️ Experimental features are unstable and may be incompatible between Meilisearch versions.

Reviewer: @guimachiavelli

Sorry, you can feel I put too much time on these details, but for me it's not.

I'm not comfortable with the word "unstable" to define our experimental features here. We named the exp features `experimental` and not `unstable` on purpose to avoid the bad advertisement it could bring. "unstable" can refer to bugs and a lack of "performance" stability, which is not here. It's only about API change.
The previous sentence was maybe less pretty, but more accurate from my POV.

<img width="944" alt="Capture d’écran 2023-07-03 à 15 55 38" src="https://github.com/meilisearch/engine-team/assets/20380692/14f9f0a9-e274-4af9-9776-1e273f74b827">

Pinging also @dureuill who was in the discussion

Reviewer 6: Ok, easy enough to fix. My proposal:

```suggestion
⚠️ Experimental features may be incompatible between Meilisearch versions.
```

Author: I've updated here and the other reference as well. Should be all good now

```bash
 curl \
  -X POST 'http://localhost:7700/indexes/movies/facet-search' \
  -H 'Content-Type: application/json'  \
  --data-binary '{
    "facetName": "genres",
    "facetQuery": "a"
  }'
```

Done by @Kerollmops in (#3699)

## Sort facet values by count

Order facets by `count` using the `sortFacetValuesBy` property of the [`faceting` index settings](https://www.meilisearch.com/docs/reference/api/settings#faceting). This allows you to sort facet values in descending order by the number of matched documents containing that facet value.

It is possible to change this ordering for all facets using `*`:

```bash
 curl \
  -X PATCH 'http://localhost:7700/indexes/movies/settings/faceting \
  -H 'Content-Type: application/json'  \
  --data-binary '{
    "sortFacetValuesBy": {"*": "count"}
  }'
```

Alternatively, it is possible to order a single facet by `count`, while other attributes follow alphanumeric ordering:

```bash
 curl \
  -X PATCH 'http://localhost:7700/indexes/movies/settings/faceting \
  -H 'Content-Type: application/json'  \
--data-binary '{
    "sortFacetValuesBy": {"*": "alpha", "genre": 'count'}
  }'
```

Done by @Kerollmops in (#3612)

> ### Language support improvements

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Language support improvements
```

* Enhance Japanese word segmentation (#218) @mosuka
* Enhance separator-based Tokenization (#215) @ManyTheFish
  - words containing `_` are now properly segmented into several words
  - brackets `{([])}` are no longer considered as context separators for the `proximity` ranking rule

Done by @ManyTheFish, @mosuka in [#3866] and in [Charabia v0.8.1](https://github.com/meilisearch/charabia/releases/tag/v0.8.1)

> ### Other improvements

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Other improvements
```

* Fixes an issue where searching for words without `.` doesn't match any string in the index ([#151](https://github.com/meilisearch/product/discussions/151), [#3778](https://github.com/meilisearch/meilisearch/discussions/3778))
* Fix an issue around incorrect deletion of documents when using the `disableOnAttributes` typo setting  (#3819) @loiclec

# Misc

* Dependencies upgrade
  * Bump actions/setup-go from 3 to 4 (#3805)
  * Bump Swatinem/rust-cache from 2.2.1 to 2.4.0 (#3803)
  * Bump svenstaro/upload-release-action from 2.5.0 to 2.6.1 (#3804)
* CIs and tests
  * Add a cron test with disabled tokenization (with @roy9495) (#3779) @curquiza
  * Improve SDK CI to choose the Docker image (#3844, #3813, #3783) @curquiza
  * Fix error messages in `check-release.sh` (#3799) @vvv

* Documentation
  * Move comments above keys in config.toml (#3731) @jirutka 
  * Add more documentation to graph-based ranking rule algorithms (#3835) @loiclec
  * Fix some broken links (#3853) @0xflotus 

* Misc
  * Revert "Improve docker cache" (#3781) @curquiza 
  * Fix some typos (#3842) @cuishuang 

❤️ Thanks again to our external contributors:

> - [Meilisearch](https://github.com/meilisearch/meilisearch): @cuishuang, @jirutka, @vvv, @0xflotus, @gentcys

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [Meilisearch](https://github.com/meilisearch/meilisearch): @cuishuang, @jirutka, @vvv, @0xflotus, @gentcys, @roy9495
```

```json 
"_rankingScore": 0.8575757575757575,
```

### Ranking score details — Experimental 

View detailed scores per ranking rule for each document with the experimental `showRankingScoreDetails` search parameter. 

```bash 
curl \
  -X POST 'http://localhost:7700/indexes/movies/search' \
  -H 'Content-Type: application/json' \
  --data-binary '{ "q": "Batman Returns", "showRankingScoreDetails": true }'
```

When `showRankingScoreDetails` is set to `true`, returned documents include a `_rankingScoreDetails` field. This field contains score values for each ranking rule.

```json 
"_rankingScoreDetails": {
  "words": {
    "order": 0,
    "matchingWords": 1,
    "maxMatchingWords": 1,
    "score": 1.0
  },
  "typo": {
    "order": 1,
    "typoCount": 0,
    "maxTypoCount": 1,
    "score": 1.0
  },
  "proximity": {
    "order": 2,
    "score": 1.0
  },
  "attribute": {
    "order": 3,
    "attributes_ranking_order": 0.8,
    "attributes_query_word_order": 0.6363636363636364,
    "score": 0.7272727272727273
  },
  "exactness": {
    "order": 4,
    "matchType": "noExactMatch",

>     "matchingWords": 0,

Author: @dureuill just highlighting I've added this based on the latest PR. any issue let me know

# v1.3.0 release changelogs

Meilisearch v1.3.0 introduces vector search, visible ranking score details, and the possibility to define fields to search on at search time. It also now includes the ability to search within facet values and sort facet values by count.

<!-- The following lines should ONLY be put in the official release changelogs -->
🧰 All official Meilisearch integrations (including SDKs, clients, and other tools) are compatible with this Meilisearch release. Integration deployment happens between 4 to 48 hours after a new version becomes available.

Some SDKs might not include all new features—consult the project repository for detailed information. Is a feature you need missing from your chosen SDK? Create an issue letting us know you need it, or, for open-source karma points, open a PR implementing it (we'll love you for that ❤️).
<br/>

---
## ⚡ Supercharge your Meilisearch experience

> Say goodbye to server deployment and manual updates with [Meilisearch Cloud](https://www.meilisearch.com/pricing?utm_campaign=oss&utm_source=engine&utm_medium=meilisearch). No credit card required.

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
Say goodbye to server deployment and manual updates with [Meilisearch Cloud](https://www.meilisearch.com/pricing?utm_campaign=oss&utm_source=engine&utm_medium=meilisearch). Get started with a 14-day free trial! No credit card required.
```

Updating he touch-point phrasing according to the latest update since the release of the 14 days trial.

https://github.com/meilisearch/meilisearch/pull/3895/files

---  
<br/>

# New features and improvements 🔥

## Vector Search — Experimental

You can now use Meilisearch as a vector store. Meilisearch allows you to add vector embeddings generated by third-party software, and use embeddings when searching with the `/search` or `/multi-search` routes.

This experimental feature can be enabled via the HTTP API using v1.3.0's new `/experimental-features` endpoint.

```bash
curl \
  -X PATCH 'http://localhost:7700/experimental-features/' \
  -H 'Content-Type: application/json'  \
  --data-binary '{
    "vectorStore": true
  }'
```

### Sending Vectorized Documents

> For the first iteration of this feature you must compute the vectors separately. Once that is done, include them in your documents using the `_vectors` field. Finally, send the documents with vector data to your instance. A single document may contain multiple vectors.

Author: Yea probably no harm. On the blog post we say "For the first iteration of this feature, you need to use an external tool such as [Hugging Face](https://huggingface.co/), [Cohere](https://cohere.com/), or [OpenAI](https://openai.com/), to create such embeddings." - so I can use the same 3 links here "with a third-party tool such as ..."

> For the first iteration of this feature you must compute the vectors separately. Once that is done, include them in your documents using the `_vectors` field. Finally, send the documents with vector data to your instance. A single document may contain multiple vectors.

Author: thats updated now

* Reduce index size (~15%) by removing an internal database (#3819) @loiclec
* Add new `/experimental-features` endpoint to configure `scoreDetails` and `vectorStore`  (#3850) @dureuill 
* Reduce deserialization time by using `RoaringBitmap::deserialize_unchecked_from` (#3788) @Kerollmops 
* Re-enable autobatching for addition and deletion tasks (#3670) @irevoire 
* Expose lastUpdate and isIndexing in /stats endpoint (#3851) @gentcys

# Fixes 🐞
* Fix matching results returned by the `exactness` ranking rules when there are hard separators present (#3824) @dureuill 
* Fixes an issue where searching for words without `.` doesn't match any string in the index ([#151](https://github.com/meilisearch/product/discussions/151), [#3778](https://github.com/meilisearch/meilisearch/discussions/3778))
* Fix an issue around incorrect deletion of documents when using the `disableOnAttributes` typo setting  (#3819) @loiclec
* Replace the `atty` dependency with the `is-terminal` due to security vulnerability (#3878) @Kerollmops

> * Fix analytics properties name total_received on multiple events (#3877) @dureuill 

Reviewer: It's not a fix for the users, can be in `Misc` section
You can also only say:
```
Fix analytics properties on multiple events (#3877) @dureuill
```

Author: thats updated now

> * Adds matchingWords and maxMatchingWords score details (#3885) @dureuill 

Reviewer: This PR is a fix following the merge of the "display score detail" feature. You can remove this line from the final changelog since the users need only to know the feature is released, no matter was the "path" to reach this.
If you want the PR to be mentioned anyway, you can add it in the related section (not mandatory, really if you want)

```
Done by @dureuill in #3771 and #3885
```

> * Fix the analytics of the sort facet values by count feature (#3890) @Kerollmops 

Reviewer: No need to add this line, it's the "sort facet value" feature. It's a fix following the merge of the feature. The users just want to know the feature is out.

> * Fix the way we compute the 99th percentile (#3891) @Kerollmops

Reviewer: Looks like it only impacts analytics, so can be in the `Misc` section instead. This is not important for the users.

Author: thats moved now

## Other improvements

> * Improve the Prometheus `/metrics` experimental feature ([#625](https://github.com/meilisearch/product/discussions/625)). Provides metrics on the task queue such as the number of queued tasks and the number of processing tasks. Adds the real database size used by Meilisearch. Add "meilisearch" prefix to metrics. Exposes lastUpdate and isIndexing in /stats endpoint (#3789, #3861, #3851) @irevoire @dureuill @gentcys

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
* Improve the Prometheus `/metrics` experimental feature ([#625](https://github.com/meilisearch/product/discussions/625)). Provides metrics on the task queue such as the number of queued tasks and the number of processing tasks. Adds the real database size used by Meilisearch. Add "meilisearch" prefix to metrics. Exposes `lastUpdate` and `isIndexing` in` /stats` endpoint (#3789, #3861, #3851) @irevoire @dureuill @gentcys
```

* Add new `/experimental-features` endpoint to configure `scoreDetails` and `vectorStore`  (#3850) @dureuill 
* Reduce deserialization time by using `RoaringBitmap::deserialize_unchecked_from` (#3788) @Kerollmops 
* Re-enable autobatching for addition and deletion tasks (#3670) @irevoire 

> * Improvements to the local Meilisearch web interface. Update mini-dashboard to version [v0.2.8](https://github.com/meilisearch/mini-dashboard/releases/tag/v0.2.8) (#3935)  @bidoubiwa

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
* Improve local search preview web interface and update mini-dashboard to version [v0.2.8](https://github.com/meilisearch/mini-dashboard/releases/tag/v0.2.8) (#3935)  @bidoubiwa
```

# Fixes 🐞
* Fix matching results returned by the `exactness` ranking rules when there are hard separators present (#3824) @dureuill 

> * Fixes an issue where searching for words without `.` doesn't match any string in the index ([#151](https://github.com/meilisearch/product/discussions/151), [#3778](https://github.com/meilisearch/meilisearch/discussions/3778))

Reviewer 6: Using consistent tense across this section's items.

```suggestion
* Fix an issue where searching for words without `.` doesn't match any string in the index ([#151](https://github.com/meilisearch/product/discussions/151), [#3778](https://github.com/meilisearch/meilisearch/discussions/3778))
```

> * Fix case-sensitive search result issues with camelCasing.  e.g. a search for `dellonghi` would previously not return a document with `DeLonghi` in it. Note: this deactivates camel case segmentation that was introduced in v1.2.0 (#3921) @ManyTheFish

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
* Fix case-sensitive search result issues with camelCasing.  For example a search for `delonghi` would previously not return a document containing `DeLonghi`. This deactivates camel case segmentation that was introduced in v1.2.0 (#3921) @ManyTheFish
```

Reviewer 3: Hello @guimachiavelli, the typo made on `dellonghi` is expected ☺️

Author: I'll update the other changes and keep the typo, thanks Many!

Reviewer 6: Ah, ok 😅 

Is this issue caused by the interaction between camel casing and typo tolerance?
